---
layout: page
title: Dissertation Abstract
tags: Research
---

In my dissertation, I explore the problem of how to maintain, on the one hand, that things in the world possess and efficaciously exercise causal powers, while, on the other hand, also maintain that God is immediately active in every causal interaction in the created world. I present various solutions to this problem as they appeared in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, centered around three debates. I show that the focus of the question itself, as well as the related notions of divine concurrence and causal powers shifted considerably in the period between Aquinas and Gabriel Biel.

After motivating the problem by reviewing the Latin medieval reception of Arabic occasionalism, the first debate I present
concerns whether God is immediately active in every action of a creature, and if yes, what this divine concurring action amounts to. With the notable exception of Durand of St.-Pourçain, most thirteenth-century thinkers, such as Aquinas, Giles of Rome, and Peter of Palude thought that the answer to the first question was affirmative. They disagreed, however, on how to understand God's concurring action, and, consequently, on the response to their mere conservationist contemporary.

The second debate, between Peter John Olivi, Duns Scotus, and Peter Aureoli focused on divine concurrence as present in human actions (especially sinful ones), and what this can tell us about divine concurrence in general. Although human action presents special problems, interestingly, Olivi's arguments against the claim that we need divine concurrence in the production of every volition apply to created causes in general, and so does Scotus's refutation of them. With Scotus, the debate expanded to questions about divine foreknowledge, but the main aim remained the same: to work out an account of concurrentism that can avoid falling into occasionalism or mere conservationism.

Occasionalism became a central problem in the third debate, between Ockham, Peter of Ailly, and Gabriel Biel (taken `debate' broadly as these three thinkers were not contemporaries). I show that although Ockham has sometimes been regarded as a proto-Humean and consequently as an occasionalist, his account of divine concurrence is surprisingly Thomistic. Peter of Ailly similarly has long had the reputation of being an occasionalist, but the attribution is again, incorrect. Finally, with Gabriel Biel, the series of debates sparked originally by the confrontation with Islamic occasionalism did indeed return to its starting point:
relying on Ockham but modifying his overall account of causation,  Biel is perhaps the first one in the West to argue for a full occasionalist view, reducing natural causality to mere *sine qua non* causes.

In summary, I show that throughout these three, distinct but interconnected debates about divine concurrence, concurrentists were navigating on a tight path between the Scylla of occasionalism and the Charybdis of mere conservationism, and that they more often than not found themselves in one of the theories they were trying to avoid. The focus of the debate shifted; nevertheless, the three aspects of concurrentism presented through the three debates are all worth considering since they provide answers to questions that are still of interest today. As I also argue, neither occasionalism nor mere conservationism is compatible with theism as it was classically understood in the Christian world --- which makes the task of working out a viable model of divine concurrence all the more pressing. 
